====== 제 목 : 한중 정상회담 및 공동 성명 사전 검토 ======

작성일 : 2008년 5월 23일

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SEOUL 001061 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/23/2018 
TAGS: KS PGOV PREL CH KN
SUBJECT: PREVIEW OF ROK-PRC SUMMIT, JOINT STATEMENT 

Classified By: POL M/C Joseph Yun. Reasons 1.4(b/d) 

요약: 5월 27~30일 중국 베이징에서 후진타오 주석과 가질 예정인 정상회담에서 이명박은 한중 관계를 현재의 “포괄적 협력 동반자관계”에서 “전략적 협력 동반자관계”로 격상하는데 합의할 것이라고 노규덕은 밝혔다. 오는 외교부 중국 몽골 국 국장이다. 양측은 또 6자 회담의 대처 상태에 대해 논의할 예정이다. 이와 함께 중국-한국 FTA와 다른 쌍무 문제들도 다룬다. 노국장은 정상회담에서 나올 중국어로 된 공동성명서 초안을 우리에게 제공했다. 초안은 이 전문의 마지막 부분에 첨부돼 있다. 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: During the May 27-30 Summit with PRC 
President Hu Jintao in Beijing, President Lee Myung-bak will 
agree to upgrade the Korea-China relationship from the 
current "Comprehensive Cooperative Partnership" to one of 
"Strategic Cooperative Partnership," said Noh Kyu-duk, 
Director of MOFAT's China and Mongolia Division. The two 
sides will also discuss the state of play in the Six Party 
Talks, North Korean refugees in China, the potential for a 
PRC-ROK free trade agreement (FTA), and other bilateral 
issues. Noh provided poloffs with a Chinese draft of a joint 
statement for the summit, attached at the end of this 
message. END SUMMARY. 

-------------------------- 
PRC-ROK Strategic Dialogue 
-------------------------- 
중국-한국 전략 대화
노국장은 “포괄적”에서 “전략적”으로 격상은 대부분 상징적인 것이 될 것이며 실제적인 내용이라는 면에서 거의 계획된 게 없다고 말했다. 노국장은 그러나 그 같은 전략적 대화가 점진적으로 양국 관계를 넓혀, 양국간 현안을 넘어 중장기 이슈들을 포함하게 될 것이라고 말했다. 한반도와 동북아의 장래 같은 이슈들이 그 것이다. 첫 번째 후속 “전략 대화” 회담은 양국의 외교부 제 1차관 사이에 열릴 것이다. 한국의 권종락 제 1차관과 중국의 차관 직무대리 완이가 그들로써 7월이나 8월 중에 회담이 있을 것이다. 질문에 대한 응답으로, 노국장은 어떤 형식이든 중국과 군사적 협력에 대해 논의하는 것은 시기상조가 될 것이라고 말했다. 
¶2. (C) Noh said that the upgrade from a "comprehensive" to 
"strategic" dialogue would be mostly symbolic, with little 
planned in the way of actual substance. Noh noted, however, 
that such a strategic dialogue could gradually broaden the 
ROK-PRC relationship beyond immediate bilateral issues to 
include medium- and long-term issues, including the future of 
the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia. The first follow-up 
"strategic dialogue" meeting will be held between the 
respective First Vice Foreign Ministers, ROK VFM Kwon 
Jong-rak and PRC standing Vice Minister Wan Yi, in either 
July or August. In response to a question, Noh said that it 
was still too early to discuss any type of military 
cooperation with China. 

------------------ 
North Korea Issues 
------------------ 
북한 문제
이 대통령은 6자 회담의 2단계 조치가 철저하게 그러나 신속하게 이행돼야 한다고 강조할 것이다. 이 대통령은 한반도의 비핵화를 불러오기 위한, 또 북한 인민들의 1인당 소득을 미화 3000달러로 끌어 올리기 위한 그의 “비핵화와 개방 3000” 비전을 설명할 것이지만, 중국측은 북한이 그 같은 조치를 거부하는데 비춰볼 때, 그 같은 정책에 대해 언급하기를 주저할 것이라고 노국장은 예상했다. 
¶3. (C) President Lee will emphasize that the Second Phase of 
the Six Party Talks should be implemented thoroughly but 
quickly, said Noh. While President Lee will explain his 
"Denuclearization and Opening 3000" vision to bring about the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and raise the per 
capita income in North Korea to USD 3000, Noh anticipated 
that the Chinese would hesitate to comment on the policy in 
light of the DPRK's rejection of the policy. 

북한 난민 문제에 관해, 이대통령은 후진타오 주석에게 중국에 체류하고 있는 탈북자의 북한 송환을 중지해달라고 요청할 계획이다. 나아가, 이대통령은 중국 당국이 한국으로 향하는 탈북자들의 수속 시간을 줄여달라고 요청할 것이다. 그러나 별도의 회담에서 외교부의 남북한 정책국의 진기훈 국장은 노무현 전대통령이 거듭해 중국 지도자들에게 탈북자 북한 송환 문제를 제기했으나, 중국측으로부터 매번 북한 사람들은 불법 경제 이민자들이라는 대답만 들었다고 말했다. 
¶4. (C) On North Korean refugees, President Lee will ask 
President Hu to stop the refoulement of North Korean refugees 
in China to North Korea. Furthermore, President Lee will ask 
for Chinese authorities to speed up the processing times for 
ROK-bound North Korean refugees. In a separate meeting, 
however, MOFAT Inter-Korean Policy Division Director Chin 
Ki-hoon said that former President Roh Moo-hyun had 
repeatedly raised the refoulement issue with Chinese leaders, 
only to be told each time that the North Koreans were illegal 
economic migrants. 

----------- 
PRC-ROK FTA 
----------- 
중국-한국 FTA 
중국은 이대통령에게 중한 FTA 협상을 압박할 것이다, 그러나 한국의 반응은 이 문제를 추후로 미루는 것이 될 것이라고 노국장은 말했다. 그 같은 FTA 가능성에 대한 중국-한국 조사위원회는 노국장에 따르면, 아마도 다음 달까지는 결론을 내릴 것 같다. 그러나 한국은 논의의 추가 진전을 보류하려 시도하고 있다. 노국장은 이대통령이 “그 같은 조사에 바탕을 두고” 우리는 그 같은 FTA의 가능성을 좀 더 탐색하게 될 것이라고 말하는 선에서 뭔가를 얘기할 것이라고 언급했다. 노국장은 중국과 일본은 한국과 FTA를 추구하는데 있어 “매우 적극적”이라고 말했다. 한중 경제협력에 대한 관심을 불러일으키기 위해 이대통령은 칭타오로 이동할 것이다. 이 곳에서는 10만 명의 한국인들이 공장과 업체를 운영하고 있다. (한국과 중국의 양국 무역 규모는 2007년 미화 1450억 달러에 이르렀다. 이는 2003년의 2배 이상으로, 당시에는 한중 무역 규모와 한미 무역 규모가 비슷했다. )
¶5. (C) The Chinese will press President Lee to launch 
negotiations on a PRC-ROK FTA, predicted Noh, but the Korean 
response will be to defer the issue to a later time. A joint 
PRC-ROK research commission on the feasibility of such an FTA 
would likely reach its conclusions by next month, according 
to Noh, but the ROK is attempting to put further developments 
on hold. Noh mentioned that President Lee would say 
something along the lines of, "On the basis of such research 
(of the joint commission), we will explore the possibility of 
such an FTA further." Noh mentioned that China and Japan 
were "very aggressive" in pursuing FTAs with the ROK. To 
call attention to ROK-China economic ties, President Lee will 
travel to Qingdao, where 100,000 South Koreans operate 
factories and businesses. (Note: ROK-China two-way trade 
volume reached USD 145 billion in 2007, more than double its 
level in 2003, when ROK-China and ROK-U.S. trade volume was 
about equal. END NOTE.) 

---------------------- 

SEOUL 00001061 002 OF 003 


Other Bilateral Issues 
---------------------- 
다른 쌍무 문제들
이대통령의 중국 방문 기간 동안, 한국은 중국 우한에 영사관을 개설한다고 발표할 예정이다. 그리고 중국측은 후주석이 한국을 방문할 때 중국 광주의 영사관을 총영사관으로 격상시켜 달라고 요청할 것이다. 
¶6. (C) During President Lee's visit, the ROK will announce 
the opening of a Korean consulate general in Wuhan, and 
expect that the Chinese will ask to upgrade their consulate 
in Gwangju to a consulate general when President Hu visits 
the ROK, said Noh. 

노국장은 이대통령이 하나의 중국 정책에 대한 약속을 계속할 것이라고 확인해줄 것이며, 8월 8일 베이징 올림픽 개막식 참석을 약속할 것이라고 덧붙였다. 이대통령은 후진타오 주석이 7월 G8 정상회담으로 가는 길에 서울을 방문해달라고 초청할 계획이다. 이대통령은 고구려 문제에 대해 중국측에 “냉정을 유지해야 한다”고 경고할 예정이다. 고구려 문제는 현재로서는 “뜨거운” 이슈는 아니다. 양국 지도자들은 대량살상무기와 하이테크 범죄, 지구 온난화, 국제 테러, 금융 범죄 등을 다루는데 있어 더욱 협력하자는데 동의할 것이다. 그러나 이들 문제는 구체화하지는 않을 것으로 예상되고 있다. 
¶7. (C) Noh further added that President Lee will confirm 
Korea's continued commitment to the One China Policy and will 
promise to attend the Beijing Olympics Opening Ceremony on 
August 8. President Lee will also invite Hu Jintao to visit 
Seoul on his way to the G8 Summit in July. President Lee 
will warn the Chinese to "keep it cool" on the Goguryeo 
issue, which was not currently a "hot" issue. The two 
leaders will agree to further cooperation in dealing with 
weapons of mass destruction, high-tech crime, global warming, 
international terrorism, and financial crimes, but are not 
expected to go into these issues in any detail. 

--------------------- 
Draft Joint Statement 
--------------------- 
초안 공동 성명서
노국장은 중국이 제안한 공동성명서 초안을 제공했다. 아래는 초안으로 한국의 동료들이 이에 대해 약간의 수정만 할 것으로 예상된다고 말했다. 
¶8. (C) Noh provided poloffs with China's suggested draft for 
a joint statement, below, saying that he expected his ROKG 
colleagues to suggest only minor changes to it: 
이하는 한-중 공동 성명서 
KOREA-CHINA JOINT STATEMENT 

President Lee Myung-bak of the Republic of Korea paid a state 
visit to the People's Republic of China from May 27 to 30, 
2008, at the invitation of President Hu Jintao of the 
People's Republic of China and received a cordial and warm 
greeting from the government and the people of China. 

During the visit, President Lee Myung-bak and President Hu 
Jintao held a summit meeting in Beijing. President Lee also 
held talks with Wu Bangguo, Chairman of the Standing 
Committee of the National People's Congress of the People's 
Republic of China, Wen Jiabao, Premier of the State Council, 
and Jia Qinglin, President of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference. 

In these talks, President Lee and Chinese leaders engaged in 
an in-depth exchange of views on even greater advances in the 
ties of friendship and cooperation between Korea and China, 
as well as on regional and international issues of common 
interest, and came to a common understanding on a wide range 
of fields. 

The two Presidents highly commended the speedy development of 
relations between Korea and China since the establishment of 
diplomatic ties in 1992 and agreed to upgrade the Korea-China 
relationship from the existing "Comprehensive Cooperative 
Partnership" to "Strategic Cooperative Partnership" and to 
further strengthen the exchanges and cooperation in all areas 
including diplomacy, security, commerce, society, culture, 
and people-to-people exchanges. 

In recognition of the need to step up their bilateral 
dialogue and cooperation, both sides agreed to establish 
diplomatic strategic dialogue mechanism and to hold the 
existing bilateral security dialogue on a regular basis. 

Both sides agreed to further strengthen the exchanges between 
their leaders, government, congress and political parties. 

Both sides recognized the long history of exchanges between 
the two countries to be a precious asset for their friendly 
relations and agreed to actively hold academic exchanges 
between their fields of history to strengthen their mutual 
understanding of history. 

The Chinese side emphasized that there is but one China in 
the world and that Taiwan is an inalienable part of the 
Chinese territory. The Korean side expressed its due 
understanding and respect for China's stance and indicated 
that it will continue to adhere to the position that the 

SEOUL 00001061 003 OF 003 


government of the People's Republic of China is the sole 
legal government of China. 

Both sides highly commended that the Joint Research on 
Korea-China FTA is making smooth progress and agreed to 
continue to study how to deal with this matter on the basis 
of the policy proposals of the Joint Research. 

The Chinese side positively commended the progress in the 
South-North reconciliation and cooperation, redeclared its 
firm and unchanging support for the reconciliation of 
inter-Korean relations, and ultimately achieving peaceful 
unification. The Chinese side expressed its expectation that 
Republic of Korea would continue to play an active role to 
realize South-North co-prosperity and peaceful unification. 

The Korean side highly commended that the Chinese side played 
a constructive role to realize peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula. 

Both sides shared the recognition that the second phase 
measures for the implementation of the Joint Statement of 
September 2005 should be comprehensively completed as soon as 
possible in accordance with the principle of "action for 
action". Both sides agreed to make a joint effort to push 
through the materialization of the goals set by the Six-Party 
Talks. 

The two sides shared the recognition that their cooperation 
is essential for the progress of the Six-Party Talks and 
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula and agreed to 
continue their close cooperation towards the peace and 
stability on the Korean peninsula and the Northeast Asian 
region as a whole. 

The two Leaders agreed to continue their close cooperation at 
the work of the United Nations and concurred that the United 
Nations regime should be reformed in such a way as to enhance 
the authority and efficiency of the world body as well as its 
transparency, democracy, and representativeness. Both sides 
expressed their support for the every effort made by the UNSG 
to enhance the efficiency and responsibility of the UN. 

Both sides agreed to further strengthen cooperation in 
dealing with the global warming, the proliferation of WMD, 
international terrorism, financial and economic crimes, 
piracy, and high-tech crimes. 

VERSHBOW